Faces of Death came up in kind of a.
strange sort of way.
Our company was a very new company.
We had only done a couple
of little things before.
and this documentary
company contacted us
about doing this.
sort of surreal effects project.
They wouldn't give us any
of the information about it.
but asked if we would
come in for an interview.
We ended up going in for an interview
and talking to them about
what it was and they said
they wanted to recreate. you know.
real death sequences
from stories that had been told
without having any footage.
When we were doing the show.
they gave us.
we watched.
hours and hours and
hours of newsreel footage.
They gave us everything just to study.
I mean. we watched six hours
of the PSA plane crash.
They gave us all these
photos that we could study.
A lot of them were rapes.
rapes that finished in death.
Some of them were just
murders in general.
And after looking at the
things that they had
chosen for us to do.
that we thought.
wow this would be a lot of fun to do.
So we put together a
budget for them to do it.
And set about to recreate them.
I started breaking everything down
what we needed to do
and what was coming up first
and what we had to do.
I think the monkey brain sequence
was like the first thing we did.
Allan Apone - Efeitos Especiais:
Well. the monkey brain sequences would.
was probably our. our biggest one.
Because everything was
going to be done in close up.
because you're sitting at this table.
and we're showing how.  you know.
these people dine on monkey brains.
And there's a special table
that's rigged for it.
and a special mallet and we
were using a live monkey.
And then we had to
make a dummy monkey.
to crack the skull and
peel back the skin.
So that was going to be
the most challenging of all.
We had to make a mallet
for the monkey to get with.
because of course. you couldn't
it the monkey with a real one.
I mean though for that film
you'd think you could him but.
but it was a trained monkey actually so.
And the guy who's in the film.
with the turban and the beard
is actually the trainer.
And they had custom-made that
little table with the little cage.
and little yoke for his neck to do the little.
exercise routine for the monkey.
Always spinning around.
ain't love doing that.
But we'd hit him with the rubber mallet.
and the monkey would
end up. biting the mallet.
So where they're always cutting
away from the mallet sequencing.
The monkey hit him in the
head and then you'd go.
he'd come back at him again.
And finally the monkey conks out.
and when you finally see
the conked out head.
it's a switch to the gelatin head.
We made the skull to fit inside.
and it was a hollow plaster skull.
And when everything
was assembled it was.
a cauliflower brain sculpted
to look like a little brain.
filled with lemon jello
with a little orange in it.
just to kind of off-color it a little.
And that was filled inside the skull.
Then before we put the skull
and we put some layers on it.
to give it... to give us some membrane.
So did we do that seek
and then inside the skull. we put
cauliflower
and we colored it.
I always forget. exactly the color.
I know the color was off because
we were laughing about it.
But the color it was sort
of a greenish gray.
that we made. that we made it. and.
we just did it with food
coloring. so that.
when we went back to
shoot with the actors.
they could actually just eat it.
The monkey head was supposed to go in.
the ice chests to keep
it cold. it didn't.
And the reaction you see on the camera.
was actually priceless. because.
the cauliflower had gonne rancid.
The Cauliflower had .had turned.
because it sat there for.
I forget it how long.
but it was a while.
And as I remember. I think
what we ended up doing was
taking it out and then just repacking
and fresh that. you know. that day.
And it's it's so funny because
it's the most. one of the most
talked about sequences
as being absolutely real.
Douglas White - Efeitos Especiais:
Then we did the sequence for
the husband who killed the wife
and kids and we show up.
I'm actually one of the detectives.
I get to get a gun with a whole bunch of blanks that shoot that house for all day.
We walked in and ran in the house
and the girl in the floor.
we made up because I had a
slash throat appliance piece for.
was our secretary. So I made her up
to look like the mother slashed up.
we put the kids down. poured blood
around the heads and stuff.
And just told not to move.
And they came in.
shaking the thing with the
with the old film lights
on camera and everything.
And I mean. it was really cool i mean.
me jeez. they got away
for everything on this one.
Very little lighting is ever used for
I think any of the stuff we did.
Except maybe. something
on the camera itself.
to make it look newsreel footage style.
But I mean.
all we were doing is having fun.
to me it was just doing makeups.
and that's what I love doing.
The other sequence was. we.
we've traveled to Florida
to shoot the sequence.
W e shot at one of the animal
theme parks down there.
And the head alligator guy
was the guy that we were
going to duplicate.
We had hired a guy by name Andy Coulis
he was a professional alligator wrestler
and he had alligators that.
he had a whole board
on the top of his nose.
and wrap wire goes up through the nose
and around the bottom of the jaw
that he ties and shot.
We were he'd be able to
get in the little pond in Florida
and wrestle the alligator
down there and then
when we had to pull the body out
we made this fake body for the come up.
So we had. he had come into town.
we'd taken the cast to him
of his head. and made a dummy body.
so we shipped that down.
And we made a dummy
alligator about the size that
he was actually gonna wrestle.
I don't think that
we ended up having that alligator.
we ended up having a different one
so it was smaller than the one.
no bigger than the one
that we had cast or
that we had duplicated.
so we were always concerned that there
was going to be a size discrepancy
when we did that whole thing.
But we did this whole
sequence all done with
i forget how many cameras
they had rolling. three or four.
and the fun thing was
that everything was done.
so real. the way they
captured it. was so real
that even though. you know. the budgets
that were we were
doing these things under.
wouldn't let you do pristine.
absolutely wonderful.
you know. duplicating work.
You built it for what is was.
we built it for knowing that
we were gonna be
you know. certain distances away.
And it works so flawless
that i have yet to ever
meet anybody who
picks that out is not real.
Everyone says that that's an
absolute and they know the people.
I mean. it's crazy.
Dr. Francis:
- The footage you are viewing
was shot by a Canadian tourist
while on vacation in the Middle East.
I decided to include
this sequence in my study
for it portrayed a
barbaric method of dealing
with the criminal.
Allan Apone - Efeitos Especiais:
- The decapitation sequence.
- Yeah. that involved a lot.
In fact. the hardest thing
about that sequence was.
it was so hot.
It was a hundred and
twenty three that day.
In the desert. when we were in Yuma.
In the sand dunes.
And we had a truck that
we had these gelatin heads.
i think we had three of them.
that we could plant and then.
put into the head rig
and then decapitate.
And we had him in this truck
and everything was cool down.
where everything was on ice.
we had in dry ice.
And so they were kept nice
and cool in the truck.
but as soon as you brought them out.
you had to. you really had 15 minutes.
That was it.
before they became. you know.
virtually unusable. you couldn't
get through them because.
they were so gummy.
We really had to work quick
to make sure these
would not milk before.
I mean. they were in ice chests
and everything but.
it just wasn't going to save them.
Once we brought him out of
the ice chest. it wasn't a take long.
- And I had to do this scene.
because I was the one
cutting the head off.
because I knew where
the chop had to be made.
and so I was dressed up
as and arabian in the scene.
and I'm supposed to come
riding in the horse.
well. I'm not a horseman.
so we filmed it once with me
coming in on the horse
and then you know.
Conan said. you know.
let's do it another way.
Douglas White - Efeitos Especiais:
- We hired this little short guy.
he was like. 4′ 8″ I think.
by the time we had him
in the shoulder rig.
and the head. it was almost 6 foot tall.
But in order to hide his hands.
I didn't want his arms coming out
through the costume so.
we rigged it. so we had
some artificial hands
coming out the back and we just
tied him behind his back.
So it just gave a good excuse
to lock him down.
And they bring him out
and he's leaning over.
and I mean. if you really look at it
it's kind of silly when he's walking out.
because he's bent the wrong angle.
his hips your way back too far.
but they came out at an
angle straight so it's kind off.
but when he stands up he's fine.
And then they lead him out.
they've come up to the front
of the log and they lean him down.
Well and I'm supposed
to be in these sandals. too.
I'm wearing these sandals.
so as I'm walking across
the sand. to where that is.
if you really watch. you can
almost see me hopping
because the sand is so hot.
that it's burning the
heck out of my feet.
So I get there and I get the sword.
and the first time we do it
I go to chop the head.
Douglas White - Efeitos Especiais:
- Allen raised his sword up.
it brings it down. cuts
the guy's head off.
The head came off perfect.
fell on the basket.
Allen reaches down.
pulls the head up. holds it up
the head falls right out of the wig.
Ok. the second time we brought him out.
the heads off. it's gotten hotter.
the heads getting stickier
we bring him out. put his head
on the log again
Allan raise it's sword. cuts.
comes down to cut the head.
And the head. the sword just sticks
in the. in the neck
because it's just melted
and it just sort of.
the heads just sort of...
- It sorts just not going
all the way through.
but I think he has to
do it three. four times.
and finally the head comes
to thaws in the basket
he goes. reaches in. pulls out.
it holds. everything is great.
It was very very funny.
so wait. okay cut.
we're gonna do it again
I said okay. well. we
can't bring out the head
Doug White's dealing with the head
I said Doug. don't bring
that thing out until
told we're absolutely ready.
So you get everything set up and
make sure the cameras are over there.
the horses are there. the extras
are where they're at supposed to be.
we get it set up.
Doug brings the head out
on the rig
we set it up. I come.
I come walking in.
grab the sword and the head
just cuts out perfectly.
Douglas White - Efeitos Especiais:
- And I mean. this is how hot it was.
I mean this time. Allan's sword
goes right through the neck.
head falls right off.
but all the gelatin in
the neck has liquefied.
it spills out as. like blood.
right across the log
I went. okay. I buy that.
We were finished by like 10:00. 10:30.
pack everything up in the truck.
for the next two hours. were out.
in the dunes running in.
and doing it in sand dunes.
in vehicles just jumping
sand and having fun.
It was such a bizarre situation too.
because it was. you know.
just trying to get all that stuff done
and we had. I mean.
there was a lot of extras
forgetting how many
we have in that scene
but there was a whole lot of people
that we had for that scene.
And I remember the setup
and looking at it.
as we were setting it up.
I was like. this is you know.
unbelievably believable.
Dr. Francis:
- After spending weeks
searching for these people.
I finally met their leader.
As he explained his beliefs and methods
I realized I was dealing with a maniac.
Douglas White - Efeitos Especiais:
- Then we did the whole cult thing
which was. we shot in a
all black magic store
down in Hollywood.
They had a ceremonial area
in the back of the shop
for those people who
when the shop was closed
they could go in
and have their own little
ceremonies in the back for real.
But John got to play the cult leader and
they hired all these
other people to come in
and be all the different people around
and they're supposedly.
they had gotten his corpse.
that they have in the middle floor.
I had wanted someone
who was really emaciated.
so one of the ladies. who is one
of the execs at the studio
she says. my son was
like really emaciated.
anorexic actually.
So we brought him in and
looked at him. I got. he's perfect
I wanted John to be able to
put a knife in the guy and split
because we had a gelatinous skin.
we're gonna plant a gelatin chest
so I want him to be able to cut it.
and so I didn't want the actor to be cutted
so I made a metal plate for his chest
then we put a real rack of sheeps ribs
on top of the metal plate.
covered in red gelatin.
and then we put. we actually
melted cheese and put on top of that
and then we put more gelatin
on top. for the bloody stuff
then I put hoses hidden
underneath all this stuff
hoping to hell that I could really
get it to bleed up. and over.
but gravity wins out and it
came down the sides.
But we hid flank steak.
raw flank steak.
in between the ribs and stuff.
Allan Apone - Efeitos Especiais:
- And then we may had some stuff in there
that people could actually eat.
and that got to be incredibly wild
because I mean.
they would just let the cameras roll.
and they rehearsed and
rehearsed. you know.
without any without any blood stuff.
just sort of. where they wanted.
what they wanted to do.
and it was very sedate when
they were doing the rehearsal.
Then they start the sequence up.
and we just tell not to breathe.
you know. breathe really shallow.
and John comes out and
slams the knife in his chest.
and rips it open and starts
and I start pumping the blood in.
we had Hudson sprayers.
with blood coming out.
but actually if it'd been a dead body.
all the blood would be in
the back cavity anyway.
so it really wouldn't have flowed out.
John reaches in. starts searching
for the flank steak pieces
that are almost now soaked in blood.
because he did have hoses away on those.
and he's pulling that out. and that's
the only blood that really comes out.
with the meat. and so he act went in
and looked like it was hacking away.
and ripping up muscles and stuff.
pulling out and handing the pieces
of meat to all the people.
and then the one girls...
the blood was actually coming down
and flowing out from underneath him.
so there's this big pool of blood on behind
and this one girl rips off her top.
started putting her hands in the blood.
and starts rubbing her chest
with it and everything.
Allan Apone - Efeitos Especiais:
- It was. it was.
kind of weird.
it was kind of strange.
when people just really have you know
they got really into it.
they acted it well.
and again. I mean.
that the key to this
and the thing that makes it so amazing.
is the way that they shot it.
And they're very very smart
in how they staged it. because.
the staging of the cameras.
the placement of the cameras.
and the movement of the cameras.
when they had it. was very believable.
to the action that was going on.
or the situation that was.
that you were being placed in.
That was a weird job.
as far as that part was concerned.
but I mean. we were trying to make
things as pseudo realistic as we could.
I mean. we didn't have
a lot of money and.
or a lot of time.
Allan Apone - Efeitos Especiais:
- There was a real body that washed up
at Huntington Beach.
actually Sunset Beach. California.
when we were just preparing to leave.
to go shoot some sequences.
And we were out there and this
person comes running up saying
it's a body on the beach.
there's a body on the beach.
well. we ran down there
to see what was going on.
Douglas White - Efeitos Especiais:
We beat the Beach Patrol.
because. nobody would.
just locals from around the area.
saying there's a body in the water.
because it came up the beach from
there that we heard that it happened.
I know it was just. like.
100 yards from where we worked.
It's serendipitous.
And then we found out.
what it happened was. this is
a guy who was missing from.
from the Friday before. who tried
to swim around Huntington Pier.
You know. he had too much drinks.
got out there. got caught in the Riptide.
and washed in. three days
later i think it was.
But he just had a little
pruning on his fingers.
and that was it. but he'd
been there since.
you know. all day sunday. saturday.
this was tuesday morning.
that's how I remember it now.
Allan Apone - Efeitos Especiais:
- It's. you know. it's pretty amazing.
because you know. working in film you
hear people talk about Faces of Death.
Every. every movie I've been on. every
somewhere. someone has
brought up Faces of Death.
and I never say anything about it.
I just always like to
hear what people say.
Douglas White - Efeitos Especiais:
- I think we did it for what we were
asked to do. I mean. we had
a lot of fun doing it too.
And then. of course. we did part two.
I'm in part two. one scene.
the bank robbery sequence.
I'm holding the camera belt
for the camera crew.
It's amazing.
because. as long as it should do.
And people know people too.
that were there. for the unreal stuff.
Oh yeah. my sister's boyfriend's friend.
was right there. when all that happened.
Song "Life"
Music by Gene Kauer
Lyrics by Jerry Winn
Sung by Bruce Scott
Subtitles by ARC TEAM